okay so let's continue our discussion of
sequences of functions
so we had two different notions of
convergence of sequences of
functions so the first
notion was pointwise convergence
so we have a sequence of functions fn
from some set s to r
another function fixed function s from
f from s to r
and then we say f
converges to fn converges to f
point wise
if
um for every x and s
the sequence of real numbers converges
to f of x so
if
for all x and s the limit
as n goes to infinity of f n of x
equals f of x
okay so i take an x out of s
stick it into
f n so now i get a sequence of real
numbers and
i should get f of x as n goes to
infinity
and then we had we introduced a stronger
notion
of convergence of functions
which was the following so still so
we have a sequence going from s to r
function from s to r
then
we said fn converges to f
uniformly
on s
if somehow across the entire set fn gets
close to s all right i mean f
so here this statement says if i take a
for each fixed x
eventually fn of x so fn evaluated at
that point
is close to f of x f evaluated at that
point but uniform convergence says
fn is
close to f across the entire set so if
for
all epsilon positive there exists
natural number m
so that
for all n bigger than or equal to m
for all x and s
f n of x
minus f of x
is less than epsilon
okay now if you write out
what this means in terms of
epsilon m's remember this is a limit so
this is a limit of sequences so this
uh means something in terms of epsilons
and m's this would say for all x and s
for all epsilon positive there exist an
m
so on right
so the for all so the x appears at the
front of this definition while here for
uniform convergence it kind of it
appears at the end that is
you know not just
um
you know
a kind of meaningless difference in the
way you write
the definition meaning
this is a stronger statement than if the
x is appearing here so
what am i going on about so first off we
proved last time
that
if i have a sequence of functions again
from some subset s to r
converging to f
uniformly then
this improv implies fn converges to f
pointwise
okay
um
but now
what i'm going to prove is that in fact
uniform convergence is something
stronger than point wise convergence in
other words this is a one-way street
right point wise convergence does not
imply uniform convergence
[Applause]
and we were just going to look at kind
of a
very specific example
which i was going to state as a theorem
so
so which is the following
let fn of x be
x to the n and now we're looking on the
unit interval 0 1
okay
and
let f
be
a function that is 0
if x is in
0 1
x equals one
okay
so first off let me
from last time
or you can even just check you know by
looking at the
the
form of fn
that
fn converges to f
point wise
if i take x in
this interval here
um so not equal to one
then
x is strictly less than one and if i
raise it to a high enough power over and
over again
uh that's converging to zero so it
converges to f of x zero
now at one i just get one and that
clearly converges to one
so fn converges to f point wise
all right
and so the claim
is that
for all
be between 0 and 1
fn converges to f and i guess i could
include 0 that would just be looking at
one point not very interesting but
fn converges to f
uniformly
and the second is
fn does not converge to f
uniformly on
the whole interval however
okay
so um maybe it's best to
again draw this picture that's you're
supposed to think about when it comes to
uniform convergence so we have the
limiting function
fn i mean f
and then we
draw a little
epsilon size collar
around
the function f
and then uniform convergence
so this is f
uh uniform convergence says that as long
as
i go far enough out the graph of fn
should be within this
little epsilon collar okay so that fn is
getting close to f uniformly across the
entire set
okay
all right
so
number two will give us a
chance to negate this definition of
uniform convergence which like i said
you should always
um
so we're actually doing two things here
we're doing giving an example of uniform
convergence
and also
a sequence of functions which does not
converge uniformly to
um
this function so
we're doing both an example and
non-example which is the best thing to
do for a new definition
so
um okay so for the proof of one let's
prove uniform convergence
so
let's be
the e in
0 1
then
the limit as n goes to infinity of b to
the n
is 0 which implies
okay so now i'm getting ahead of myself
not write that yet
so now we want to prove uniform
convergence of fn to f on
uh
i didn't finish this statement f into f
uniformly on
sorry about that b
so i have uniform convergence on any
smaller interval
uh other than zero one okay
so sorry about that if that looked a
little
weird um
okay
so then bn converges to zero u um
as in goes to infinity now we want to
prove that fn converges to f uniformly
on this interval zero b
so let epsilon be positive we now have
to find an m so that fn is close to
zero because
uh f is zero on such an interval
now since b to the n converges to 0
there exists
natural number m
such that
for all n bigger than or equal to m
b to the n is less than epsilon
then
we're all in bigger than or equal to m
we get
and also for all x
0 b
we get that f n of x
minus f of x
so
b is less than 1 so when i stick it into
f i just get 0
this is equal to
x to the n minus 0 an absolute value is
just x to the n because we're on
we're looking at non-negative x
and now x is in
this interval 0 b so it's less than or
equal to b so x to the n is going to be
less than or equal to b to the n
and this is less than epsilon
okay
so you know just as when
we looked at uniform continuity of a
function
it was a statement like there's for all
epsilon there exists a delta which just
depends on
uh basically the epsilon in the function
okay
now for uniform convergence
it looks kind of like a point wise
convergence except now for every epsilon
you can find an m
which
does not depend on the point x okay so
for every epsilon you can find an m
depending only on epsilon and maybe the
function little f okay but that doesn't
depend on x right this n here that i
chose m
depended only on b
right not the point x which i have to
stick into this
uh here
okay
okay so now
let's
prove number two
so first off let's negate the definition
so that we know what we're talking about
so
fn does not converge to f
uniformly
on the set s
if
there exists a bat so every for all
becomes a there exists okay
so if there exists some bad epsilon not
positive so that
for all
m
natural number there exists
an n bigger than or equal to m
and there exists an x in s
so that
fn
of x
minus f of x
is bigger than or equal to epsilon
naught
okay
so um
you know this is the negation but why
should we
not be surprised that fn
does not converge to f uniformly on zero
one if you believe this picture so let's
look at
what's going on here
so let me draw now um
the graph of f
and let's say i take epsilon to be uh i
don't know a fourth
say
so
okay now this is what my little uh
epsilon
neighborhood of f looks like or epsilon
2 is you know it's it's
uh right along or for epsilon equals a
fourth say
it's you know
a tube around zero up to x equals one
and then you know it's a little
uh area around one and now if i were to
have uniform convergence
then as long as n is very large fn has
to be
within this
uh
area that i've
um
that i have here so you know in fact let
me shade it in
so for f and large it has to be within
this um region that i'm coloring in
all right but now what what do we know
about x to the n well
you know it starts at 0 and ends at 1
and looks something like
that which means
here always it leaves this you know
epsilon
uh
tube around f this epsilon collar i
guess all right
epsilon fn leaves the shaded area which
is where it's supposed to
stay
so i hope this um
you know intuitive def you know
explanation um
is clear and and is
why it shouldn't be too big of a
surprise that fn does not converge to f
uniformly on zero one we'll see another
reason
and a little bit why it's impossible for
fn to converge to f uniformly when we
talk about the interchange of limits but
um just using the definition we can
prove
that fn does not converge to f uniformly
so
all right the negation is for all
uh is that there exists about an epsilon
zero so that uh we have all of this so
um
you know the point is is to choose
epsilon so that
this never intersects with this
epsilon
uh neighborhood of
the function down here never intersects
with this epsilon neighborhood of just
you know the point
x equals 1 y equals 1. so
um
let's choose
epsilon not to be a fourth
okay
so now we have to prove for all m there
exist to n so
let m be a natural number
choose n to be m
and choose x
to be
let's say one over four
to the
one over m
okay
now this is a number less than one so
its nth root is less than 1 and also
positive
okay
then
this f of x equals 0.
and f sub m
of this x which is just 1 over the 1
over 4 to the 1 over m now raised to the
nth power is 1 over 4
which implies that
f of m of x minus f of x
is equal
1 4
which equals
epsilon 0.
or i guess if you like
you can write bigger than or equal to
epsilon 0.
okay
so
um
yeah basically if you choose any so
there was nothing special about epsilon
zero being one-fourth you choose
anything less than one that would do
okay just you can check that if i chose
one-half here i could then choose this
point x where fm
is far away from f of x to be one over
one half to the or one half to the one
over m
okay
just as long as i don't choose you know
epsilon zero to be equal to one
okay
so
so we have that uh example
and
you know we had a another sequence of
functions we had looked at last time
which were these functions that look
like little that look like tenths i
don't know why i'm making this axis
bigger when it should be the other one
so there's one
one over n
one over two n
and then way up here at two in so
i'm at this point
and then it's piecewise linear so then
it's just a straight line down to here
i'm not going to write down exactly
the equation for each piece but
and then 0
to 1.
so this is fn
and we proved that
so last time we proved that fn
converges to the function 0
point wise
right
but it does not converge uniformly to
zero again what's the so what's the
point the point here is that you know if
i were to draw a little
epsilon
collar around the function zero it would
look something like
like this
and fn would have to be within this
little strip
for all n sufficiently large but
you know fn is getting taller and taller
so it always leaves
you know kind of any strip that i put
around the function zero
all right so
fn does not converge to zero uniformly
we can make a proof out of that though
so
fn does not converse to 0 uniformly
on
so i should always
tell you where talking about and this
should
on 0 1.
so why not well we can take any epsilon
0 really so
let's choose
epsilon 0 to be
1.
let m be a natural number
so we should find an n and a x so that
this inequality is satisfied so let's
choose n to be m
x to be 1 over 2 m this point where i
peak
yeah
then
f of m of x
minus f of x
now f here
is just zero the the limiting function
is zero
so let me not even put f let me put just
s equals
fm of 1 over 2m
which equals 2m
right
and this is certainly bigger than or
equal to
1 which is epsilon zero okay
okay
now
in a little bit
you know i'll give you a whole host of
examples it seems like i've only given
you maybe one example up to this point
of functions which converge uniformly to
zero to something but in a minute i'll
give you a
very useful
test
to decide when
you know a series involving functions
converges uniformly
but before we get to that
um
let's revisit these three questions that
we asked
um
in the last lecture in the context of
power series but now in this more
general setting of convergence of
functions
so
now what i'm talking about and this is
really
although i'm what i'm about to say may
sound uh
a bit alarming that we're now in
essentially the last week of the class
and we're really getting to the first
real part of analysis
so i was uh
talking with a professor from
duke one time and
you know he
made this
funny observation that somehow in math
and i think this is not just math but
this is a lot of you know
a lot of science-based classes um
are taught you know if you
were to translate it into studying a
book it's like you spend a year
studying
you know introductions to a book
and then you spend a year studying
middle parts of books and then you spend
another year
studying the last parts of books
so
now here we're starting to get into the
middle part of uh the book of analysis
not the textbook we're at the end of
that but at least in the the grand
scheme of things which is the
interchange of limits you have two
limiting processes
that you want
to
interchange okay
an analysis you know
first god created the limit
and then man asked can we interchange
limits
um
and so what i mean by that this this is
not always
you know a thing you can do so
um and this is
at the very heart of analysis what is
when can we interchange limits so let me
give you the simplest example
let's say we have
the following
limit
so i take the limit as k goes to
infinity of the limit as n goes to
infinity of
n over k
n over k plus 1.
so that's just a sequence depending on n
and k all right now as n goes to
infinity what do i get
uh
this is just equal to
um well i can
you know
multiply the bottom by k to get rid of
this one so then i just get n over n
plus k remember k is fixed
and then i take the limit as n goes to
infinity so i get 1.
so i'm taking the limit as k goes to
infinity of this expression
now for each k when i take the limit as
n goes to infinity i get 1.
so i get 1 there
now what happens if i interchange the
limit
and now look at the limit as n goes to
infinity of
the limit as k goes to infinity
of
n over k
plus 1.
well now as k goes to infinity
for each n
so remember i'm taking the limit as n
goes to infinity of this
expression which is
formally this expression with the limits
interchanged
this is equal to 0 over 0 plus 1
equals 0.
and
these two
do not equal each other so it's not
always the case that you can interchange
limits
okay
that's the the
simple fact of life
and
you know
to be able to make certain statements do
certain computations
you know it
you need to be able to interchange
limits and and
you know what kind of limits maybe
uh taking an infinite sum and
integrating
or
um like we stated in the beginning you
know power series are in a sense a
certain limit they're a limit of partial
sums of their limit of polynomials right
and then
let's say differentiation that's a limit
so if
um
a natural question like we said last
time is is the derivative of this
infinite sum the infinite sum of the
derivative those are two limiting
processes
processes which we're asking can we
interchange
okay
so the three questions again that i
asked in terms of power series i'm going
to now frame again
um
in this general setting so
if fn
from
s to r
f
from s to r
and f n converges to f
maybe point wise or uniformly so let's
leave this open ended for now
because these are the only two notions
we have of convergence
and let me make
so suppose fn is from s to r f is s r
and f n converges to f point y's on or
uniformly
and so this sentence is not written very
well and
fn is continuous for all
n
then is f
continuous
okay so suppose we have a sequence of
continuous functions
converging to another function f either
point wise or uniformly
is the limiting function continuous and
i'll explain in a minute why this is a
limiting you know kind of asking can we
interchange two limits
second question is um
suppose fn
from
a b to r
is
differentiable
for all n
f from a b to r
and
we have that fn converges to f
you know either point wise or uniform
we're leaving this open-ended for now
and the derivatives also converge
say to some function g
then
is f
differentiable
and
is
the limit of the derivatives equal to
the derivative of the limit
okay
and then last question so this is the
third kind of main limiting process
we've seen in this class which is
integration
suppose fn
is a sequence of continuous functions
f is a continuous function
and
f fn converges to f again maybe either
point wise or uniformly we're leaving
this open-ended for now
does
the limit
of
the integrals equal the integral of the
limit
okay
now
again i want you to you know it's really
i guess more clear here
um
the fact that we're asking about
interchanging two limits so here we have
this uh integration is just a symbol for
taking this limiting process right where
you take a sequence of partitions of a b
with norm converging to zero then the
integral from a to b of fn this is
defined to be this limit of
riemann sums right
so this is a limiting process here
although i'm writing it with this simple
notation so i'm asking it can i take
this limit as n goes to infinity
and can i interchange it with this
limiting process now for continuity it's
kind of
maybe a little more hidden on what's the
interchange of limits that you're really
looking at
so
it looks more like this so remember
for 1
we're asking you know
suppose x
is in
i said s
x n is the sequence
converging to x
then
basically can we do this
now i would like to show that f of x
is equal to the limit as n goes to
infinity of f of x sub n
so
let me actually make this a m i'm going
to use two different
let's use a k
so if i compute limit as k goes to
infinity of f of x of k
i would like to show that equals f of x
if i'm trying to show that the limit is
continuous assuming the functions that
are converging to f are continuous if i
look at the limit as k goes to infinity
then i'm tempted to do the following
that this is equal to
the limit as k goes to infinity of
the limit
as n goes to infinity
of fn of x assuming either point wise
convergence or uniform convergence
xk
and now
if i'm
you know just being a little bit
careless i interchange limits
and write this as the limit as n goes to
infinity of the limit
as k goes to infinity so here is kind of
where i'm
asking can i interchange limits
again this is not a proof this is
discussion on what is the interchange of
limits that i'm looking at for question
number one question number three is more
clear
and then you know for this once i've
done this you know differentiability
will
be a clear a little bit clearer on what
is the
you know interchange of limits i'm
looking at
so
let's say i was you know just doing
whatever i like and going through this
then i would you know interchange these
limits um
and
since each of these fn's are continuous
then the limit as k goes to infinity of
fn of x sub k and x sub k converges to x
this just gives me f n of x
and so and since fn again converges to f
in some sense this should give me f of x
right so what i'm asking
is was all this okay
because at some point at this point in
particular i had to interchange a limit
yeah
and we've just seen that we can't always
do that we can't always interchange
limits and get the same thing
here we got one
when we interchange the limit we got
zero so it's not always the case that
i can interchange limits this
equality between this limit and the
interchange limit is the big question
mark
so
that's the the whole basis for question
number one
okay so i hope that uh discussion wasn't
was clear enough
now
the answer to these three questions is
in fact yes
but only for uniform convergence
if f
if all if the convergence
right and this is
the mode of convergence we must have so
that the answer to all of these three
questions which is
you know will state and prove his
theorems is uh are correct
now
uh
know the natural question is what if we
have a weaker hypothesis namely what if
we only assume point wise convergence
uh is the answer to any of these
questions
uh yes and uh
well no okay so the answer to all three
of these questions is no if we only
assume pointwise convergence
so
so let's go through
an example showing that each of these
three questions is no
if we only assume point wise convergence
so let's look at
an example showing one is no if we only
assume
point wise convergence and we basically
already have it on the board
take fn of x to be
x to the n
on zero one
x is in
okay then
each of these functions
so
and for all n
fn is a continuous function on zero one
fn converges to f
point wise
but f itself is not
a continuous function
okay so this provides an example of a
sequence of functions which converges
point wise to a function which is not
continuous okay again what i was saying
there in the answer is that
if i have a sequence of functions which
converges uniformly to a function f then
that function is continuous
here if we only assume point wise
convergence
we may not get a continuous function in
the end all right and this is what this
example shows fn of x equals x to the n
these are all continuous functions they
converge to a function which
is not continuous point wise
okay
and that's you know
um
okay i'll say something else in in a
minute so let's look at example two now
basically we take the previous example
and kind of integrate it to get an
example of a sequence of functions with
uh that converges and its derivative
converges point wise so
for
two
take fn of x to be
x to the n over n
on zero one
then
a couple of things
fn converges to zero
fn prime
converges to
the function f
which is the same function from here
so let me actually make this g
okay and these are point wise
so i have a sequence of
differentiable functions that converge
pointwise to something and the
derivatives also converge pointwise to
something
and
[Applause]
but so let's call
f equals 0
but
g
is not equal to
f prime the derivative of f the constant
function zero is just zero g is equal to
this to this function which is zero if x
is n zero one
and one if x is equal to one so
here we see that the
derivative of the limit is not the limit
of the derivatives if we only assume
point wise convergence of the functions
now the last example showing that 3 does
not hold if we only assume point wise
convergence is also on the board it's
the whole point of this uh
this one up there
so
um
let's go on and let's go on the next
board
[Applause]
so here
f in from 0 to 1
to r
is the function
this tenth function 1
over n 1 over 2 n
2 n
it's just piecewise linear so it's zero
from
one over n to one
it goes up to
um
one over two n
two n and then back down to the origin
okay
and so we know that fn
converges to 0
point wise
now the integral of 0 is just 0. let's
look at the
integral of fn from 0 to 1.
the integral of 0 1 of fn now if we were
all together this would be the point
where
i stop and ask if anybody can remember
the area of a triangle
even though we're in this advanced
analysis class
but i don't get to ask you that i get to
just ask myself that and i know the
answer
because i'm prepared and only because of
that this is one half
base times the height
so remember the integral is an area
and
you know i could write down the formula
of
you know what this function is and
actually integrate it out using the
fundamental theorem of calculus but just
go with me on this that the integral of
fn is just the area of this triangle
that
has base going starting at zero and
going to one over n
and
it peaks at two in
so
the base
is
1 over n the height is 2n
so this equals 1
for all n see this is why i was making
it peak
so
the integral from 0 to 1 which is
just 1 for all n
does not converge to
the integral of the limit
okay
so in this case
the limit of the integrals is not the
integral of the limit if we only and
what's the reason because we only have
point wise convergence all right like i
said a minute ago the answer is yes to
all three of these questions if the
convergence is uniform and what these
three examples are supposed to show you
is the answer is no
if i only assume point wise convergence
the weaker notion of convergence
okay
okay so let's uh let's now
prove some theorems
so this first theorem addresses question
one
suppose fn from s to r
f from s to r
fn is
continuous meaning it's continuous at
every point in s
we're all in
and
fn converges to f
uniformly
on
s
then the conclusion is that f is
continuous
okay
all right so the proof
um i mean we've done several proofs of
like this before but uh
for some reason and at least i see in
textbooks for this proof they always
refer to it as an epsilon over three
argument
and then it's the last time they call it
an epsilon over three argument
so
we have to show uh f is continuous at
every point in s so let c be a point in
s
let epsilon be positive we have to find
a delta so that for all
uh x minus c less than delta an absolute
value f of x minus f of c is less than
epsilon
and what we're going to do is we're
basically going to replace f
by some fm for m large enough and the
fact that we have uniform convergence
is what allows us to do that so
let epsilon be positive
since the fns converge to f
uniformly there exists a natural number
m
so that
for all n bigger than or equal to m
for all y and s
f m
of y minus f of y
is less than
epsilon over 3.
okay
okay now this f sub uh capital m
i'm just going to fix that so
this should be n
but now i mean so this is for all n
bigger than or equal to capital m i
really just need one so let's look at
f sub capital m that's a continuous
function
since f sub capital m
is continuous
there exists
a delta positive
so that
for all
x minus if x is uh
within distance delta to c
so
then i get that f
sub m of x minus f sub m of c
is less than
epsilon over 3.
so then this delta here so i have been
okay so i'm
doing something what
you know i stopped doing something which
i was doing in all previous lectures
when i would say there exists a delta
naught choose delta to be this delta
naught there exists a m0 choose m to be
this m0 now you know i'm actually saying
uh i've dropped that and stopped doing
that because it should be clear from the
context of now what i'm choosing delta
to be so
and for all
x minus c less than delta so i'm saying
that i'm now choosing this delta that
came from here
which came from
f sub capital m capital m came from this
what i needed here
so now if i look at f of x minus f of c
which i want to show is less than
epsilon
uh
now if i add and subtract f sub m of x
and f sub m of c
and use the triangle inequality this is
less than or equal to
f of x minus f sub m
of x
plus
f sub m of x
minus
f sub m of c
plus f sub
m of c minus
uh f c
okay so i just added and subtracted f
sub m of x and f of m sub of c
and then use the triangle inequality
now
by
this uh
estimate here
since i'm looking at a
particular n basically equal to m
i have this is less than epsilon over
three no matter what y is
in this
set so then certainly for x i'll have
this is less than epsilon over three
how i chose delta remember was to
guarantee that this would be less than
epsilon over three
as long as x minus c is less than delta
and then of course this one is less than
epsilon over three again because of this
uniform closeness of fm to f
and therefore for all
uh absolute value of x minus c less than
delta i have f of x minus f of c is
less than
epsilon and that finishes the proof
so
if we have uniform convergence then
uh the uniform so
you know
a good theorem should be able to be
stated in one sentence
and with this or at least some sort of
simple to an easy way to remember it
what this says is the uniform limit of
continuous functions is continuous
okay
so the uniform limit of continuous
functions
is continuous
next we'll show
[Applause]
in a sense the uniform limit of
differentiable functions is continuous
and we're going to do kind of a
the simplest
statement of that
although one can make you know stronger
statements
but in practice this one suffices really
at least in
where it pops up later in life
um but before i get to that one
yeah before i get to that one let's do
three
um which is
uh let's see what would be the short way
of saying that
uh
the integral of the uniform limit is the
limit of the integrals
okay something like that that would be
the short and sweet way
of stating the the following theorem
which is
so this is an answer to three so we
skipped over two for a minute
suppose fn
is a sequence of continuous functions on
a b because we're going to be talking
about limits and we've only i mean
integrals and we've only spoken about
integrals for continuous functions
suppose fn is a continuous function on a
b
f from
a b to r
and f n converges to f
uniformly
note that that's so
by what we just proven the previous
theorem
this automatically guarantees that f
is the continuous function so we can ask
about the
relationship between the integral of f
and the limit of the integrals of f n
then the limit
as n goes to infinity
from the integral from a to b of fn
equals
the integral from a b to f
okay so the
integral of the uniform limit is the
limit of the integrals
okay
all right so this is just a sequence of
numbers and we want to show it converges
to this number here
so let's do this the old-fashioned way
let epsilon be positive
since fn converges to f
uniformly
there exists a natural number m
such that
we're all in uh
for all n bigger than or equal to m
for all x and a b
f n of x
minus f of x
is less than epsilon
okay
now basically what we're going to do is
integrate this inequality
and remember integration unlike
differentiation integration respects
inequalities
and for all n bigger than or equal to m
meaning i'm choosing m uh
i'm choosing my m as this guy
for this
proving this limit
if i look at
the integral from a b
of f n
minus the integral of a b to f
this is
by linearity of the integral the
integral of f n
minus f absolute value by the triangle
inequality for integrals which we proved
this is less than or equal to the
integral
from a b
of fn minus f
and what do we know for all n bigger
than or equal to m
this
function here fn of x minus f of x an
absolute value
is bounded by epsilon
okay and therefore the integral of this
side is going to be less than the
integral of the right side so i did this
wrong let's put a b minus a over this
so this is less than integral a b
epsilon over
b minus a
and so then i just pick up this number
times the length of the interval
which equals epsilon
so for all n bigger than or equal to m
the absolute value of this integral of f
of f sub n minus the integral of f is
less than epsilon
so
the integral of the uniform limit is the
lim is the limit of the integrals
so now we'll use this
to do the last
interchange of limits
theorem that i had in mind so
number two
so
and again this is kind of the simplest
statement uh and maybe easiest to prove
that one can make
one can make stronger statements and
prove them but in most cases this
suffices
so
suppose
fn a b to r
so this is a
continuously
differentiable
for all n
f and g these are two functions from a b
to r
and fn converges to f
uniformly
on a b
and the derivatives
converge uniformly to this function g
okay
uh
and in fact i don't even need this
you could just say point wise
so
i only need uniform convergence of the
derivatives if i'm assuming if i'm
assuming everything is continuously
differentiable
if i'm assuming the sequences are
continuously differentiable
then
f
is differentiable
in fact continuously differentiable
meaning the derivative is continuous
and
the derivative of f is equal to g
meaning that
the uniform limit of the derivatives
converges to the derivative of f
okay
so
again what this says is uh the uniform
limit of or at least in essence in
spirit is not exactly what it says but
it says the uniform limit of
continuously differentiable functions
is
differentiable
okay and that the derivative of the
uniform limit is
uh the limit of
is
so
the derivative of the uniform limit is
the uniform limit of the derivatives
okay
so to prove this we use the fundamental
theorem of calculus
okay
so
let x be a point in a b
then by the fundamental
theorem of calculus
if i want
f n of x
by not one but if i
take f n of x minus f n of a this is
equal to the integral from a to x
of fn prime right the integral of the
derivative gives me back the function
evaluated at the endpoints
and therefore since i know pointwise
convergence these two numbers converge
pointwise to f of x and f of a
respectively so f of x minus f of a
equals the limit as n goes to infinity
of f
n of x minus f n of a
and this is equal to
just by the previous expression
the limit
as n goes to infinity of the integral
from a to x of f prime
now
f n prime sorry
now these f and primes are converging to
g this function g uniformly
and therefore the integrals converge
right that's what we just proved
this equals the integral of the limit
and therefore
so we started off with f of x minus f of
a and we showed it's equal to the
integral from a to x of g
so f of x
equals f of a
plus the integral from a to x
of g
but now again by the fundamental theorem
of calculus
this implies that
f is
differentiable
and the derivative of f of x
the derivative of f is equal to the
derivative so remember f of a that's
just a constant equals the derivative
of this function which is g
okay
i think we have
just enough time to prove one more
pretty good theorem
pretty good it's very good
[Applause]
and
you know it was
and then we'll use it in our next
lecture to discuss
you know or at least
conclude some answers that we originally
asked about power series
so this theorem is due to the godfather
virustrass
i don't know did i refer to him as a
godfather or riemann as a godfather
anyways i think it was virustras that i
refer to as the godfather
who proved the following theorem
you know when can you guarantee uniform
convergence uh
for at least series of functions which
are you know limits of
partial sum so limits of functions
and he proved this you know basically so
he could
come up with a whole host of examples
for
of continuous functions with
which are nowhere differentiable
we kind of gave a proof of this theorem
when we looked at that example
when we were talking about
differentiability but
we didn't state it as a theorem there so
let's take
a sequence of functions fj
from s to r
and
suppose
there exists
a sequence mj
such that two things hold so these are a
sequence of positive numbers
so
okay i don't know why i just erased that
but so we have a sequence of functions
from s to r in a sequence of positive
numbers so that
these numbers dominate the fj's so
um and two
they're summable so sum from
j equals one to infinity
so
is convergent
okay
then the conclusion
and since i've been using numbers for
conclusions and letters for hypotheses
let's go back to that then we have two
conclusions
the first one is pretty obvious
for all x and s
this uh
series where i just take x and stick it
into f sub j this
converges
absolutely
and the second is
if i define now the function to be the
sum of these series
then the partial sums converge to f
uniformly
converges to f
as n goes to infinity
on s
okay so if i have a sequence of
functions bound to each one bounded by
some number m sub j positive number and
or non-negative number at least
and the series involving the m sub js
are is convergent
then
the series of the f sub j's converges
uniformly okay that's the conclusion
all right
so in our example of that continuous
nowhere differentiable functions each of
this these f sub js
were
you know
cosine of so
cosine of 160 j
uh x
over four to the j
right
um
so before we prove this theorem
we can combine all of the what we've
done so far to state the following
function f of x
equals sum from
j equals 1 to infinity and i can make it
something else but let's say sine of
40k over 2 to the k
x
is
continuous
on let's say 0 1
for now
okay i could say on r
okay why is that
each of these f sub
i'm really butchering this trying to go
fast
each of these functions
this is 2 to the j not 2.
each of these functions is bounded by 1
over 2 to the j
and
1 over 2 to the j is summable okay so
then by this theorem
this uh
convergence so this function here
is the uniform limit of
the partial sums
the partial sums are just
you know a finite sum involving sine so
they're continuous functions
so f is the uniform limit of continuous
functions and is therefore continuous
okay so we could have used this theorem
uh to prove that that function we looked
at back in differentiability was
continuous but we didn't have you know
uniform convergence and all that back
then so we just proved it by hand but
you know using this
um
so this theorem you're gonna you know
gives you a big class of
of
sequences of functions which converge
uniformly to some function
okay
okay so one all right so let's prove
this uh quickly
so one follows from what does it follow
it follows from
uh
from the assumption a
b
and the comparison test
right if i take an x and s
f sub j of x is bounded by m sub j and
uh
m sub j is summable this series
converges so by
um the comparison test
the sum with absolute values here for
each fixed x converges
and that's absolute convergence so
okay now let's show that the partial
sums converge to the limit uniformly
okay
so let
epsilon be positive
since
this sum
converges
there exists
an m a natural number
so that remember we have this koshi
criterion for
um
well i guess we don't have to have so
that uh what um
some from n equals n plus 1
to infinity of m sub
j so j
which is equal to
i chose a poor
i chose a poor letter so this m here
should not let's change this to an n
so this is less than epsilon so the
point is that the tail is small the sum
from j equals n plus one to infinity of
m sub j is less than epsilon
and for all n bigger than or equal to
this capital n
for all x and s
if i look at the limit
which is f of x this
sum of the series minus
sum from j equals 1 to
n
this is equal to
now f of x is equal to the whole sum so
minus this first part this is equal to
sum from j equals n plus 1
to infinity of f of
j of x
and by the triangle inequality which
does hold for convergence series this
uh this is less than or equal to sum
from j equals
n plus one to
infinity
of
f of j of x and
by assumption num by assumption a
this is less than or equal to sum from j
equals
n plus one to infinity of m sub j
and since n is bigger than or equal to
capital n i have this is
less than
or equal to sum from j equals capital n
plus 1 to infinity of m sub j
and
this thing we chose capital n so that
that's less than epsilon
and that's the end so we chose
again this n was chosen depending only
on this series it didn't depend on any x
at any you know
uh it didn't depend on the point x and s
all right
so i had to go through that kind of
quickly because i'm up against the time
crunch
but
the point is for this theorem
is that
if i have a sequence of functions that
are bounded by
you know these numbers m sub j so this
is a
that was going so fast i didn't even
label it correctly this is called the
buyer straw m test
m because you see m here
if i have a sequence of functions
bounded by some numbers m sub j and
those m sub js are summable then
what it says is that
the series of
the functions converges uniformly
okay
all right so we'll stop there